---
title: "Trade Balances in Historical and International Context"
layout: page
---


<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Analyze graphs of the current account balance and the merchandise trade balance
* Identify patterns in U.S. trade surpluses and deficits
* Compare the U.S. trade surpluses and deficits to other countries\' trade surpluses and deficits

</div>

The history of the U.S. current account balance in recent decades is presented in several different ways. [\[link\]](#CNX_Econ_C23_004) (a) shows the current account balance and the merchandise trade balance in dollar terms. [\[link\]](#CNX_Econ_C23_004) (b) shows the current account balance and merchandise account balance yet again, this time presented as a share of the GDP for that year. By dividing the trade deficit in each year by GDP in that year, [\[link\]](#CNX_Econ_C23_004) (b) factors out both inflation and growth in the real economy.

 ![The first graph shows the current account and merchandise trade balance in nominal dollars. Both lines dropped drastically between 1995 and 2005, and while they have both risen since then, they are still both below &#x2013;$400 billion. The second graph shows the current account and merchandise trade balance as percentages of GDP. Both dropped around 1986, but increased gradually until 1991, when both dropped again with the low around 2005. Today, both current account and merchandise credit make up around &#x2013;3% and &#x2013;4% of the GDP respectively.](../resources/CNX_Econ_C23_004.jpg "(a) The current account balance and the merchandise trade balance in billions of dollars from 1960 to 2012. If the lines are above zero dollars, the United States was running a positive trade balance and current account balance. If the lines fall below zero dollars, the United States is running a trade deficit and a deficit in its current account balance. (b) These same items&#x2014;trade balance and current account balance&#x2014;are shown in relationship to the size of the U.S. economy, or GDP, from 1960 to 2012."){: #CNX_Econ_C23_004 data-title="Current Account Balance and Merchandise Trade Balance, 1960&#x2013;2012 "}

By either measure, the general pattern of the U.S. balance of trade is clear. From the 1960s into the 1970s, the U.S. economy had mostly small trade surpluses—that is, the graphs of [\[link\]](#CNX_Econ_C23_004) show positive numbers. However, starting in the 1980s, the trade deficit increased rapidly, and after a tiny surplus in 1991, the current account trade deficit got even larger in the late 1990s and into the mid-2000s. However, the trade deficit declined in 2009 after the recession had taken hold.

[\[link\]](#Table_23_04) shows the U.S. trade picture in 2013 compared with some other economies from around the world. While the U.S. economy has consistently run trade deficits in recent years, Japan and many European nations, among them France and Germany, have consistently run trade surpluses. Some of the other countries listed include Brazil, the largest economy in Latin America; Nigeria, the largest economy in Africa; and China, India, and Korea. The first column offers one measure of the globalization of an economy: **exports of goods and services as a percentage of GDP**{: data-type="term"}. The second column shows the trade balance. Most of the time, most countries have trade surpluses or deficits that are less than 5% of GDP. As you can see, the U.S. current account is negative 3.1%, while Germany’s is positive 6.2%.

<table id="Table_23_04" summary="This table has fourteen rows and three columns. The first row is a header row and it labels each column. The first column is unlabeled, the second column is labeled &#x201C;Exports of Goods and Services&#x201D;, and the third column is labeled &#x201C;Current Account Balance&#x201D;. Under the first column, there is a list of countries which includes: the United States, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Canada, Sweden, Korea, Mexico, Brazil, China, India, Nigeria, and the World. Under the second column &#x201C;Exports of Goods and Services&#x201D; are the following percentages: 14%; 15%; 50%; 32%; 30%; 50%; 56%; 32%; 12%; 31%; 24%; 40%; and nothing. Under the column &#x201C;Current Account Balance&#x201D; are the following percentages: &#x2013;3.1%; 2.0%; 6.2%; &#x2013;1.3%; &#x2013;3.0%; 7.0%; 2.3%; &#x2013;0.8%; &#x2013;2.1%; 1.9%; &#x2013;3.2%; 3.6%; and 0.0%."><caption><span data-type="title">Level and Balance of Trade in 2012 (figures as a percentage of GDP)</span></caption><thead>
<tr>
<th />
<th>Exports of Goods and Services</th>
<th>Current Account Balance</th>
</tr>
</thead><tbody>
<tr>
<td>United States</td>
<td>14%</td>
<td>–3.1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Japan</td>
<td>15%</td>
<td>2.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Germany</td>
<td>50%</td>
<td>6.2%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>United Kingdom</td>
<td>32%</td>
<td>–1.3%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Canada</td>
<td>30%</td>
<td>–3.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sweden</td>
<td>50%</td>
<td>7.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Korea</td>
<td>56%</td>
<td>2.3%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Mexico</td>
<td>32%</td>
<td>–0.8%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Brazil</td>
<td>12%</td>
<td>–2.1%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>China</td>
<td>31%</td>
<td>1.9%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>India</td>
<td>24%</td>
<td>–3.2%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Nigeria</td>
<td>40%</td>
<td>3.6%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>World</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>0.0%</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>

# Key Concepts and Summary

The United States developed large trade surpluses in the early 1980s, swung back to a tiny trade surplus in 1991, and then had even larger trade deficits in the late 1990s and early 2000s. As we will see below, a trade deficit necessarily means a net inflow of financial capital from abroad, while a trade surplus necessarily means a net outflow of financial capital from an economy to other countries.

# Self-Check Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In what way does comparing a country’s exports to GDP reflect how globalized it is?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
GDP is a dollar value of all production of goods and services. Exports are produced domestically but shipped abroad. The percent ratio of exports to GDP gives us an idea of how important exports are to the national economy out of all goods and services produced. For example, exports represent only 14% of U.S. GDP, but 50% of Germany’s GDP

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Canada’s GDP is $1.736 trillion and its exports are $447 billion. What is Canada’s export ratio?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Divide $447 billion by $1,736 trillion.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The GDP for the United States is $14.7 trillion and its current account balance is –$291 billion. What percent of GDP is the current account balance?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Divide –291 billion by $14.7 trillion.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Why does the trade balance and the current account balance track so closely together over time?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
The trade balance is the difference between exports and imports. The current account balance includes this number (whether it is a trade balance or a trade surplus), but also includes international flows of money from global investments.

</div>
</div>

# Review Question

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In recent decades, has the U.S. trade balance usually been in deficit, surplus, or balanced?

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If a country is a big exporter, is it more exposed to global financial crises?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If countries reduced trade barriers, would the international flows of money increase?

</div>
</div>

